Adding a dumpload of documentation (#113)
ESMValGroup/ESMValCore: doc/esmvalcore/datafinder.rst

:: _inputdata:

***********
Data finder
***********

Overview
========
Data discovery and retrieval is the first step in any evaluation process; ESMValTool

> uses a `semi-automated` data finding mechanism performed by the ``_data_finder.py`` module

Reviewer: I think @bouweandela suggested not to mention private modules in the documentation.

Author: removed

finder module is `semi`-automated is that the user will have to provide the tool with a set
of parameters related to the data needed; the reason why it is semi-`automated` is that once
these parameters have been provided, the tool will automatically find the right data. We will
detail below the data finding and retrieval process and the inputs the user needs to specify,
giving examples on how to use the data finding routine under different scenarios.

.. _CMOR-DRS:

CMIP data: CMOR Data Reference Syntax (DRS) and the ESGF
========================================================
CMIP data is widely available via the Earth System Grid Federation (`ESGF <https://esgf.llnl.gov/>`_)
and is accessible to users either via dowload from the ESGF portal or through the ESGF data nodes hosted
by large computing facilities (like CEDA-Jasmin, DKRZ etc). This data adheres to, among other standards,
the DRS and Controlled Vocabulary standard for naming files and structured paths; the `DRS <https://www.ecmwf.int/sites/default/files/elibrary/2014/13713-data-reference-syntax-governing-standards-within-climate-research-data-archived-esgf.pdf>`_

> ensures that files and paths to them are named according to a standardized convention. An example of this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ensures that files and paths to them are named according to a standardized convention. Examples of this
```

> convention, and also used by ESMValTool for file discovery and data retrieval can be seen here:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
convention, and also used by ESMValTool for file discovery and data retrieval, include::
```

* CMIP6 file: ``[variable_short_name]_[mip]_[dataset_name]_[experiment]_[ensemble]_[grid]_[start-date]-[end-date].nc``
* CMIP5 file: ``[variable_short_name]_[mip]_[dataset_name]_[experiment]_[ensemble]_[start-date]-[end-date].nc``
* OBS file: ``[project]_[dataset_name]_[type]_[version]_[mip]_[short_name]_[start-date]-[end-date].nc``

and similar standards exist for the standard paths (input directories); for the ESGF data nodes,

> these paths differ slightly, an example is given below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
these paths differ slightly, for example:
```

* CMIP6 path for BADC: ``ROOT-BADC/[institute]/[dataset_name]/[experiment]/[ensemble]/[mip]/
  [variable_short_name]/[grid]``;
* CMIP6 path for ETHZ: ``ROOT-ETHZ/[experiment]/[mip]/[variable_short_name]/[dataset_name]/[ensemble]/[grid]``

From the ESMValTool user perspective the number of data input parameters is optimized to allow for ease of use.
We detail this procedure in the next section.

Data retrieval
==============
Data retrieval in ESMValTool has two main aspects from the user's point of view:

* data can be found by the tool, subject to availability on disk;

> * it is the user's responsibility to set the corect data retrieval parameters;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* it is the user's responsibility to set the correct data retrieval parameters;
```

The first point is self-explanatory: if the user runs the tool on a machine that has access to a data
repository or multiple data repositories, then ESMValTool will look for and find the avaialble data requested
by the user.

> The second point underlines the fact that the user has full control over what type and the amount of data they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second point underlines the fact that the user has full control over what type and the amount of data
```

> need for their analyses. Setting the data retrieval parameters is explained below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
needed for the analyses. Setting the data retrieval parameters is explained below:
```

Setting the correct root paths
------------------------------
The first step towards providing ESMValTool the correct set of parameters for data retrieval is setting
the root paths to the data. This is done in the user configuration file ``config-user.yml``.
The two sections where the user will set the paths are ``rootpath`` and ``drs``. ``rootpath`` contains pointers
to ``CMIP``, ``OBS``, ``default`` and ``RAWOBS`` root paths; ``drs`` sets the type of directory structure
the root paths are structured by. It is important to first discuss the ``drs`` parameter: as we've seen in
the previous section, the DRS as a standard is used for both file naming conventions and for directory structures.

.. _config-user-drs:

Explaining ``config-user/drs: CMIP5:`` or ``config-user/drs: CMIP6:``
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Whreas ESMValTool will **always** use the CMOR standard for file naming (please refer above), by setting the ``drs``
parameter the user tells the tool what type of root paths they need the data from, e.g.:

  .. code-block:: yaml

   drs:
     CMIP6: BADC

> will tell the tool that the user needs data from a repository structured according to the BADC DRS structure `ie`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will tell the tool that the user needs data from a repository structured according to the BADC DRS structure, i.e.:
```

``BADC`` can be replaced with ``DKRZ`` or ``ETHZ`` depending on the existing ``ROOT`` directory structure.

The snippet

  .. code-block:: yaml

   drs:
     CMIP6: default

is another way to retrieve data from a ``ROOT`` directory that has no DRS-like structure; ``default`` is
a directory that contains all the needed data files (a bucket full of everything).

.. note::
   When using ``CMIP6: default`` or ``CMIP5: default`` it is important to remember that all the needed files
   must be in the same top-level directory set by ``default`` (see below how to set ``default``).

.. _config-user-rootpath:

Explaining ``config-user/rootpath:``
------------------------------------

``rootpath`` identifies the root directory for different data types (``ROOT`` as we used it above):

* ``CMIP`` e.g. ``CMIP5`` or ``CMIP6``: this is the `root` path(s) to where the CMIP files are stored;
  it can be a single path or a list of paths; it can point to an ESGF node or it can point to a user
  private repository;

  Example for a CMIP5 root path pointing to the ESGF node on CEDA-Jasmin (formerly known as BADC):

  .. code-block:: yaml

    CMIP5: /badc/cmip5/data/cmip5/output1

>   Example for a CMIP6 root path pointing to the ESGF node on CEDA-Jasmin (formerly known as BADC):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Example for a CMIP6 root path pointing to the ESGF node on CEDA-Jasmin:
```
No need to repeat this.

Author: this is needed since a lot of people still think BADC is separate from Jasmin

Reviewer: I just wanted to point out that it is a repetition, since the same sentence appears three times.

Author: removed it, it took me two commits :grin:

  .. code-block:: yaml

    CMIP6: /badc/cmip6/data/CMIP6/CMIP

>   Example for a mix of CMIP6 root path pointing to the ESGF node on CEDA-Jasmin (formerly known as BADC)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Example for a mix of CMIP6 root path pointing to the ESGF node on CEDA-Jasmin:
```

  and a user-specific data repository for extra data:

  .. code-block:: yaml

    CMIP6: [/badc/cmip6/data/CMIP6/CMIP, /home/users/joepesci/cmip_data]

* ``OBS``: this is the `root` path(s) to where the observational datasets are stored; again, this could
  be a single path or a list of paths, just like for CMIP data.

  Example for the OBS path for a large cache of observation datasets on CEDA-Jasmin:

  .. code-block:: yaml

    OBS: /group_workspaces/jasmin4/esmeval/obsdata-v2

* ``default``: this is the `root` path(s) to where files are stored without any DRS-like directory
  structure; in a nutshell, this is a single directory that should contain all the files needed by the

>   run, without any sub-directory structure.

Reviewer: Is that really the case? Or would the tool search into this path regardless of subdirectories?

Author: yes, if it's not OBS, the files need to sit in the top level dir

* ``RAWOBS``: this is the `root` path(s) to where the raw observational data files are stored; this is

>   used by ``cmorize_obs``.

Reviewer: Add link to respective section.

Author: no idea where that is, can you add it pls? :beer:

Reviewer: https://esmvaltool.readthedocs.io/en/latest/getting_started/inputdata.html#observations

Author: I believe that'll throw an error since that file is not in the toc tree, we can add a ref to that after this is merged

Reviewer: @JaroCamphuijsen is there a way to add a reference in ESMValCore to a section which is in ESMValTool (in this case Input data in Getting started)?

.. _findingdata:

************
Finding data
************

Overview
========
Data discovery and retrieval is the first step in any evaluation process;
ESMValTool uses a `semi-automated` data finding mechanism with inputs from both
the user configuration file and the recipe file. The reason why the data finder
module is `semi`-automated is that the user will have to provide the tool with

> a set of parameters related to the data needed; the reason why it is

Reviewer 2: This phrase is repeated twice.

Reviewer: Rephrased.

semi-`automated` is that once these parameters have been provided, the tool
will automatically find the right data. We will detail below the data finding

> and retrieval process and the inputs the user needs to specify, giving examples

Reviewer 3: "input" instead of "inputs"?

Reviewer: Fixed.

structures. 

.. _config-user-drs:

Explaining ``config-user/drs: CMIP5:`` or ``config-user/drs: CMIP6:``
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Whreas ESMValTool will **always** use the CMOR standard for file naming (please
refer above), by setting the ``drs`` parameter the user tells the tool what
type of root paths they need the data from, e.g.: 

  .. code-block:: yaml

   drs:
     CMIP6: BADC

will tell the tool that the user needs data from a repository structured
according to the BADC DRS structure, i.e.:

``ROOT/[institute]/[dataset_name]/[experiment]/[ensemble]/[mip]/[variable_short_name]/[grid]``;

setting the ``ROOT`` parameter is explained below. This is a
strictly-structured repository tree and if there are any sort of irregularities
(e.g. there is no ``[mip]`` directory) the data will not be found! ``BADC`` can
be replaced with ``DKRZ`` or ``ETHZ`` depending on the existing ``ROOT``
directory structure.
The snippet

  .. code-block:: yaml

   drs:
     CMIP6: default

is another way to retrieve data from a ``ROOT`` directory that has no DRS-like
structure; ``default`` indicates that the data lies in a directory that

> contains all the files without any structire.

Reviewer 3: Should be "structure" instead of "structire"?

Reviewer: I guess so.

.. note::
   When using ``CMIP6: default`` or ``CMIP5: default`` it is important to
   remember that all the needed files must be in the same top-level directory
   set by ``default`` (see below how to set ``default``).

.. _config-user-rootpath:

Explaining ``config-user/rootpath:``
------------------------------------

``rootpath`` identifies the root directory for different data types (``ROOT`` as we used it above):

* ``CMIP`` e.g. ``CMIP5`` or ``CMIP6``: this is the `root` path(s) to where the
  CMIP files are stored; it can be a single path or a list of paths; it can
  point to an ESGF node or it can point to a user private repository. Example
  for a CMIP5 root path pointing to the ESGF node on CEDA-Jasmin (formerly
  known as BADC):

  .. code-block:: yaml

    CMIP5: /badc/cmip5/data/cmip5/output1

  Example for a CMIP6 root path pointing to the ESGF node on CEDA-Jasmin:

  .. code-block:: yaml

    CMIP6: /badc/cmip6/data/CMIP6/CMIP

  Example for a mix of CMIP6 root path pointing to the ESGF node on CEDA-Jasmin
  and a user-specific data repository for extra data:

  .. code-block:: yaml

>     CMIP6: [/badc/cmip6/data/CMIP6/CMIP, /home/users/joepesci/cmip_data]

Reviewer 3: joe pesci is working with CMIP data??  :D

Reviewer: Not anymore, removed.

then look for variable ``ta`` and specifically the latest version of the data
file: 

``/badc/cmip6/data/CMIP6/CMIP/MOHC/UKESM1-0-LL/historical/r1i1p1f2/Amon/ta/gn/latest/``

and finally, using the file naming definition from CMOR-DRS_ find the file:

``/badc/cmip6/data/CMIP6/CMIP/MOHC/UKESM1-0-LL/historical/r1i1p1f2/Amon/ta/gn/latest/ta_Amon_UKESM1-0-LL_historical_r1i1p1f2_gn_195001-201412.nc``

.. _observations:

Observational data
==================
Observational data is retrieved in the same manner as CMIP data, for example
using the ``OBS`` root path set to:

  .. code-block:: yaml

    OBS: /group_workspaces/jasmin4/esmeval/obsdata-v2

and the dataset:

  .. code-block:: yaml

    - {dataset: ERA-Interim,  project: OBS,  type: reanaly,  version: 1,  start_year: 2014,  end_year: 2015,  tier: 3}

in ``recipe.yml`` in ``datasets`` or ``additional_datasets``, the rules set in
CMOR-DRS_ are used again and the file will be automatically found:

``/group_workspaces/jasmin4/esmeval/obsdata-v2/Tier3/ERA-Interim/OBS_ERA-Interim_reanaly_1_Amon_ta_201401-201412.nc``

Note that for observational data for ``drs: default`` the ``default`` directory
must contain a sub-directory:

> ``TierX`` (``Tier1``, ``Tier2`` or ``Tier3``).

Reviewer 3: Do we need to explain here what the different "Tiers" stand for? Or is that explained somewhere else?

Reviewer 2: It would be good to explain it (briefly) here, even if it does appear elsewhere. You never know the order that someone reads documentation - or how thoroughly they read it!

Reviewer: Done.
